#summary A list of research related to semantic vector spaces generally.

This is a large topic on which much has been written. There are many many more papers we should add here, please feel free to write in with suggestions. Or even better, join the project and start adding them yourself.

===Papers that talk about the SemanticVectors Package itself===

[http://www.puttypeg.com/papers/semanticvectors.v2.pdf Semantic Vectors: A Scalable Open Source Package and Online Technology Management Application]. Dominic Widdows, Kathleen Ferraro, 2008.

Empirical Distributional Semantics: Methods and Biomedical Applications. Trevor Cohen, Dominic Widdows, Journal of Biomedical Informatics (2009) (to appear).

===Papers that use the SemanticVectors Package to generate results===

_Please let us know if you have any articles to add to this list, it is really good for the project to know what results people have obtained using the software._

See also ProjectsUsingSemanticVectors.

*New!* Newton, G. & A. Callahan & M. Dumontier. 2009. Semantic Journal Mapping for Search Visualization in a Large Scale Article Digital Library. Second Workshop on Very Large Digital Libraries at the European Conference on Digital Libraries (ECDL) 2009. http://gnewton.ca/u/gn/2009/ecdl2009Newton_20090723.pdf.

[http://www.puttypeg.com/papers/semantic-vector-products.pdf Semantic Vector Products: Some Initial Investigations]. Dominic Widdows, Proceedings of the Second AAAI Symposium on Quantum Interaction, 2008.

[http://www.puttypeg.com/papers/synopticvectors.pdf Semantic Vector Combinations and the Synoptic Gospels]. Dominic Widdows, Trevor Cohen, Third International Symposium on Quantum Interaction, 2009.

===Core Papers on Random Projection===

(See also RandomProjection.)

*New!* Pentti Kanerva. [http://www.springerlink.com/content/966151841g415165/ Hyperdimensional Computing: An Introduction to Computing in Distributed Representation with High-Dimensional Random Vectors]. Cognitive Computation, 2009.

Magnus Sahlgren. [http://www.sics.se/~mange/papers/RI_intro.pdf An introduction to random indexing.] Technical report, 2005. 

See also the excellent collection at http://www.sics.se/~mange/random_indexing.html.

Ella Bingham and Heikki Mannila. [http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/bingham01random.html Random projection in dimensionality reduction: applications to image and text data]. In Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 245–250, 2001.

===Introductory Material on Semantic Vector Spaces===

[http://www.puttypeg.com/book/ Geometry and Meaning], Dominic Widdows, CSLI Publications, 2004. The [http://infomap.stanford.edu/papers/vector-chapter.pdf sample chapter] may be particularly useful to those unfamiliar with vectors.

==Papers about Semantic Spaces more generally==

===Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA)===

Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). 
[http://lsa.colorado.edu/papers/plato/plato.annote.html A solution to Plato's problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of the acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.] Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.

===Hyperspace Analogue to Language (HAL)===

HAL is the grandfather of another of the main types of semantic space models, term-term coocurrence ("sliding context window") models. See http://hal.ucr.edu/Papers.html

See also Hinrich Schutze, [http://www.aclweb.org/anthology-new/J/J98/J98-1004.pdf Automatic word sense discrimination]. Computational Linguistics. Volume 24-1 (March 1998)

===BEAGLE Model===

Jones, M. N., & Mewhort,D. J. K. (2007). [http://www.indiana.edu/~clcl/BEAGLE/Jones_Mewhort_PR.pdf Representing word meaning and order information in a composite holographic lexicon]. Psychological Review, 114, 1-37.

For a detailed introduction to holographic reduces representations, see
Tony Plate. [http://csli-publications.stanford.edu/site/1575864304.html Holographic Reduced Representation: Distributed Representation for Cognitive Structures]. CSLI Publications.